So let's go over permissions and security
and how that works before actually
starting seeing those APIs,
those capabilities that I'm promising.
So permissions and security.
So some permissions, so
some APIs are harmless.
So they have no cost,
no costing money, no coasting privacy.
I know it's just some information,
some ability or no playing a sound.
Playing a sound over the speakers
barely can harm your ears.
Yeah, but it has no cost.
Some other APIs and permissions,
they open a privacy risk.
For example, opening the camera,
opening the microphone,
getting the user's location, the
geolocation, so where you are on Earth.
And yeah, there is a privacy risk there.
And sometimes it can involve a cost,
such as making a call, sending an SMS.
Okay, so there is a real cost there.
So when there are costs or risks,
some browsers decide to put a limit
on the usage of that capability.
The W3C specs of the standard for
the web platform,
typically that's not to say what you do.
So sometimes there are recommendations
that the standard recommends the use
eration.
So the browser to limit this API, but
each browser decides
how to implement that.
Okay, let's say that most of
the browser's are kind of the same but
there are some API's that are different.
So for example, on Firefox,
you might see a permission dialog for
using that API and in Chrome, you don't.
Okay, so it's not the same experience
on every browser for some API's.
Sometimes they just need user engagement
and requirements, for example, Chrome.
Remember I mentioned one API
that we won't cover today,
that was known as Background Sync.
Background Sync lets you sync your data
in the background a few minutes later or
a few hours later.
Let's say you're on an app,
I know it's a calendar app, webapp.
You're storing your new kind of entry but
for some reason the server is down or
you don't have connection
you're offline for
whatever reason you are on a plane and
that plane has no Wi Fi.
So what to do with that?
Yeah, you can save it on
IndexedDB locally, but yeah,
if you don't open that up again,
that new entry will never hit the server.
Well, with Background Sync,
you can ask the browser, hey browser,
I know we don't have connection right now,
but
can we try later,
even if the user forgets about this?
Well, background sync will do that.
When you get out of the plane and
you turn off airplane mode, the browser,
even if the user is not
opening the browser.
The browser is running
in the background and
it will know that now
we do have connection.
Okay, I have a pending thing.
Let's try to do that Chrome
will not give the permission to
the user permission dialog at all.
So if you're the developer, you're asking
for that sync operation the requirement to
use that capability is a user engagement
requirement, which roughly means.
That Chrome will check if the user
is currently using your app or not.
If it's using your app frequently,
and that algorithm is,
I don't want to say secret
because it's open source, but
it's not something that you can manage.
So if there is enough user engagement,
when you try to use the API,
it will grant you access.
If not, it will deny you access.
But the most common scenario, and
probably you know that as a user,
is to see a permission dialog.
You enter a Zoom call from the website,
or a Google Meet call, or
a Microsoft Teams call, from the browser,
and the first thing you see
is a dialogue asking you for
a camera and microphone access, okay?
Or Google Maps asking you for
geolocation access.
Well, that's a permission dialogue, okay?
cool, most capabilities these days,
require HTTPS.
Mostly on Chromium-based browsers.
Safari is still supporting HTTP for that,
so if you want to get users location,
if you want to connect to a bluetooth
device, you must be in HTTPS.
And you know that that's a restriction for
having a website today.
So also some capabilities will need
the user interaction to be enabled.
For example, microphone and camera,
or what that depends on the browser,
but geolocation, bluetooth,
Web Push, sometimes for
the user to see a dialog
with the permission dialog.
The user has to first click on
a button you can not request that
permission when the page loads,
because that's a user experience problem.
Before this we were getting into websites
that were asking for permissions all
the time you don't know why you're
there yet, so you typically say no.
So now you require a user interaction
before actually asking for permission.
Permissions are granted on an origin base,
so
if the user is granting you permission for
a capability,
you will get that permission for
the whole origin, so the whole domain.
Different HTMLs,
different folders in the same domain
will also get granted that permission.
You cannot narrow that permission
per folder, or per file,
or per PWA, or per manifest, or
per service worker, no, it's per origin.
Okay, which is good and
bad, it's just what it is.
If the user denies a permission,
the API won't be able to ask again.
You can ask, but
it will be automatically denied.
So if the user said no,
you as a JavaScript developer,
you don't have a way to
request that dialogue again.
The only way you have,
if it's denied immediately,
you can show a message to the user.
The user needs to go manually
to the browser settings.
I will show you where they are on each
browser and re-enable that permission.
Okay, If the user grants the permission,
depending on the capability,
it may have no time limit.
So it will be like forever,
you are granted forever, for
a couple of days,
sometimes it's 15 days, 13 days a week,
sometimes for a session or
sometimes per one usage.
It depends on the capability and
it depends on the browser.
For example, camera and microphone,
it's typically per session.
Geolocation is typically per usage,
so it depends.
It depends on the capability.
You cannot manage that, okay?
Just keep in mind and
that's the user experience.
It's the best scenario world.